In the night of the 16th of May, the deadline approached for the Dutch House of Representatives Elections to publish the “Hoofdlijnenakkoord” (for translation see title). The representatives of the biggest political parties by votes (greatly right-wing) were discussing this “Hoofdlijnenakkoord” until deep in the night; days before the deadline and published the document in question within the deadline.

The result is a  (source: Hoofdlijnenakkoord tussen de fracties van PVV, VVD, NSC en BBB | Publicatie | Kabinetsformatie (kabinetsformatie2023.nl)). 

This does not come as a surprise to many Dutch citizens this “Hooflijnenakkoord” took until the very last day to create considering the extreme views taken by some politcal parties and the general political distance between the politcal parties and their respective representatives. This was already noticable from the last days of the electoral campaign last year of the House of the Representatives electoralswhere they would (quite rude sometimes) “bully” each other on national television. A general trend (in my opinion since the corana pandemic) towards disconnect between political parties and kindness can be observed and it’s trickle down effects on society. Quite tragic but perhaps the unintentional effects of looking too much to America for our entertainment and secretley our politics. America is after all the leader in technology, GDP, entertainment, military and a few other areas. New York used to be a part of The Netherlands so in light of the ever-rising nationalism and patriotism in The Netherlands Americanizing politcs may not come as such a surprise after all. 

What is interesting to note tis that the “Hooflijnenakkoord” is only officially avaialble in the Dutch language. Very likeley this is unintentional (occam’s razor) but perhaps this is a slight nod to waters the biggest political parties to fare in – less immigration, less international student, less european interference in some cases etc. (note: greatly simplified).

What caught my attention the most is the statement in Chapter 7 Statement 17 (Page 18):

“Er komt een wetenschappelijke standaard voor het gebruik van modellen en algoritmes. Beide moeten openbaar en navolgbaar zijn. De bijsluiter maakt duidelijk waarvoor ze wel en waarvoor ze niet bedoeld zijn en gebruikt kunnen worden.”

Translation:

“There will be a scientific standard for the use of models and algorithms. Both must be public and understandable. The accompanying information will clarify what they are and are not intended for and can be used for.”

After thinking every day about this statement since it’s publication 5 days ago, I have the following questions:

1. “There will be a scientific standard …” What entity will be responsible for creating/maintaining the scientific standard? If it’s just the Netherlands, The Netherlands will be hindering their A.I. progress due to increasing bureaucracy. IT Documentation is already a difficult thing to do (of IT businesses of all sizes) and is not valued as important in IT (that it works is more important than how it works. We apply this same logic (albeit largeley unconsiously) to all things we use day to day. Does an average person know/cares how a train works on a low-granularity level? Does an average person know where their food comes from? Quite logical considering we can’t be questioning everything (system 1 rather than system 2) because that would slow us down too much. So this is omething that is not in The Netherlands best interest to persue.

Adding to the argument a few years ago (2019) the following offical document was published called: “Strategisch Actieplan voor Artificiële Intelligentie” (“Strategic Actionplan for Artifical Intelligence”) published in 2019 we can see the following on page 10:  “Urgentie om te versnellen. Nederland moet gaan versnellen op het gebied van AI. AI is namelijk cruciaal voor de efficiëntie en effectiviteit van alle sectoren en domeinen.” (“Urgency to increase speed. The Netherlands should increase speed in the A.I. industry. A.I. is crucial for the efficiency and effectiveness of all secors and domains)
(source: Rapport SAPAI (overheid.nl)) 

If it will be an European Agreement, What will prevent other (rising) global powers to ignore this agreement and instead of replicating an similar agreement – will ignore everything and will value innovation over anything else? Quite strange if the cabinet will be towards this direction considering the general anti-EU sentiment which is proven by mutlitple clauses within the “Hoofdlijnenakkoord” (for example: Chapter 4 Point 2 describes the following;  In Europa wordt met lef alles op alles gezet om Europese richtlijnen zo aan te passen dat ze werkbaar zijn en het verdienmodel ondersteunen. This signals a distrust in the existing European laws.

If it will be an agreement with every single country in the world, that would quite possibly one of the greatest geopolitical achievements of our time. 

Perhaps one of the most beautiful aspects of IT is that it is (to a certain degree, protocols etc. left out) free. I truly believe freedom increases innovation, not stifles it (regarding all endevours)

2. I have a sense that the word “algorithm” is used as a buzzword considering something as simple as mutiplication could be considered an algorithm. Who will define what an algorithm is? 

3. All models and algortihms used in business and research should be public? I think it it clear quite possibly everybody in the current society would agree that A.I. would be to some degree beneificial to the progress of a society. Wouldn’t the public requirement force everybody to “out” secrets regarding A.I.? The netherlands is already behind in this technology and would be more so if this would be implemented. The next revolution of moving to mind word to creative work will certainly will not be taking place in The Netherlands. Also considering the fact that the finanial landscape of the netherlands will change due to to three points (in my observation): (Forced) reduction of farming due to elevated levels of nitrogen in the ground, Halting of fracking gas extractaction in our Province Groningen and general acceptance of the citiziens, businesses and the government to (heavily) invest in energy transition with no to little financial benefit to show for it. 

4. Intended information that would be mandatory to provide with the spread of models and algorithms would be formed in a way like the general terms of condition everybody just click the check mark box to and not read it. If it would be legally binding to not use certain models/algorithms for certain purposes we would strain the National and International Security Team capacity even more. Considering there are far greater and very serious subjects that need to be adressed in cyberspace regarding security and law this would be considered an ineffecient allocation of resources and even dangerous proposition. Considering software developers and especially software testers/auditors are not exacly high-supply jobs/skills It would be interesting to see how this would roll out. Perhaps implement an A.I. model to mandatory run withing Dutch IT Architecture would be an relative quick and easy solution.
5. The word traceable is used in the translation of the original word “navolgbaar” but perhaps a better (rough) translation that encapsulates the essence of the word would be: “understandable by humans”. This is by far the most tragic thing I have read in the whole hoofdlijnenakkoord. There are a lot of A.I. models that are so called “black-box” . You put information in, you get information out but what happens in-between could be either a. a big mistery b. a slighly less big mystery. Considering some specialised A.I. models can (almost) always outperform humans (for example: Alpha Go A.I. Great documentary that I would recommend watching). If you have watched it, what do you think?  Are you scared and filled with dread or are you fascinated and hopeful? I think whichever camp is the biggest will write the direction of humankind. 

I think it’s very egotistical (but frankly, quite logical considering we always view the world from ourselves) to believe we are the smartest species on earth and always will be. To take a simple example: Humans can only observe a small fraction of colors available in the world. I think we have to think very carefully of the input and architecture and output of A.I. models (and algortihms) but we also have to let the control go in a sense as a parent that lets their child bycicle on their own without sidewheels for the first time. Are we ready to take the sidewheels off or are we going to always be scared?
